tispark_userguide (#10492)
pingcap/docs: tispark-overview.md

+ TiSpark supports Spark >= 2.3, but does not support any Spark versions earlier than 2.3.
+ TiSpark requires JDK 1.8 and Scala 2.11/2.12.
+ TiSpark runs in any Spark mode such as `YARN`, `Mesos`, and `Standalone`.

## Recommended deployment configurations of Spark

> **Warning:**
>
> You may find TiSpark can be deployment by TiUP in this [doc](/tispark-deployment-topology.md). Note that it has been deprecated.

Since TiSpark is a TiDB connector of Spark, to use it, a running Spark cluster is required.

Here we give some basic advice for the deployment of Spark. Please Turn to the [Spark official website](https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/hardware-provisioning.html) for detailed hardware recommendations.

For independent deployment of Spark cluster:

+ It is recommended to allocate 32G memory for Spark. Reserve at least 25% of the memory for the operating system and the buffer cache.
+ It is recommended to provision at least 8 to 16 cores per machine for Spark. First, you must assign all the CPU cores to Spark.

The following is an example based on the `spark-env.sh` configuration:

```
SPARK_EXECUTOR_MEMORY = 32g
SPARK_WORKER_MEMORY = 32g
SPARK_WORKER_CORES = 8
```

> For the hybrid deployment of Spark and TiKV, add the resources required by Spark to the resources reserved in TiKV, and allocate 25% of the memory for the system.

Author: 这样感觉意思变了？

> For the hybrid deployment of Spark and TiKV, add the resources required by Spark to the resources reserved in TiKV, and allocate 25% of the memory for the system.

Author: 这里我们讨论了一下，直接删掉了。不作啥混合部署的推荐

The following versions of TiSpark's jar will no longer include `mysql-connector-java`.

- TiSpark > 3.0.1
- TiSpark > 2.5.1 for TiSpark 2.5.x
- TiSpark > 2.4.3 for TiSpark 2.4.x

Now, TiSpark needs `mysql-connector-java` for writing and auth. Please import `mysql-connector-java` manually when you need to write or auth.

- you can import it by putting the jar into spark jars file

- you can also import it when you submit spark job like

```
spark-submit --jars tispark-assembly-3.0_2.12-3.1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar,mysql-connector-java-8.0.29.jar
```

### Choose TiSpark Version

You can choose TiSpark version according to your TiDB and Spark version

| TiSpark version | TiDB、TiKV、PD version | Spark version | Scala version |
| ---------------  | -------------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| 2.4.x-scala_2.11 | 5.x, 4.x             | 2.3.x, 2.4.x   | 2.11          |
| 2.4.x-scala_2.12 | 5.x, 4.x             | 2.4.x         | 2.12          |
| 2.5.x            | 5.x, 4.x             | 3.0.x, 3.1.x   | 2.12          |
| 3.0.x            | 5.x, 4.x             | 3.0.x, 3.1.x, 3.2.x|2.12|
| 3.1.x            | 6.x, 5.x, 4.x             | 3.0.x, 3.1.x, 3.2.x, 3.3.x|2.12|

> - TiSpark 2.4.3, 2.5.2, 3.0.2, 3.1.0 is the latest stable version, which is highly recommended.

Reviewer: 最新稳定版有四个版本么？不是应该只有一个么？
```suggestion
TiSpark 2.4.3, 2.5.2, 3.0.2, and 3.1.0 are the latest stable versions and are highly recommended.
```

Author: 有四个，各个 release 分支的最新版本。今天刚发了 2.4.4，之前发了 3.1.1 我顺便更新下

### Get TiSpark jar

> - get from [maven central](https://search.maven.org/) and search with GroupId [![Maven Search](https://img.shields.io/badge/com.pingcap/tispark-green.svg)](http://search.maven.org/#search%7Cga%7C1%7Cpingcap)
> - get from [TiSpark releases](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/releases)
> - build from source with the steps below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can get the TiSpark jar using one of the following methods:

- Get from [maven central](https://search.maven.org/) and search with GroupId [![Maven Search](https://img.shields.io/badge/com.pingcap/tispark-green.svg)](http://search.maven.org/#search%7Cga%7C1%7Cpingcap)
- Get from [TiSpark releases](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/releases)
- Build from source with the steps below
```

> Currently, java8 is the only choice to build TiSpark, run mvn -version to check.

Reviewer: `Currently, java8 is the only choice to build TiSpark,`似乎不必要。这里是介绍步骤，不建议掺杂太多说明和介绍。

Author: 如果不是 java8 下面的步骤会失败。我感觉还是需要的？就是用什么形式说明有什么建议吗

```
git clone https://github.com/pingcap/tispark.git
```

Run the following command under the TiSpark root directory:

```
// add -Dmaven.test.skip=true to skip the tests
mvn clean install -Dmaven.test.skip=true
// or you can add properties to specify spark version
mvn clean install -Dmaven.test.skip=true -Pspark3.2.1
```

### TiSpark jar's Artifact ID

> > The Artifact ID of TiSpark is a bit different in different TiSpark version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Artifact ID of TiSpark varies with TiSpark versions.
```

```

Start spark-shell with the --jars option

```
spark-shell --jars tispark-assembly-{version}.jar
```

### Get TiSpark version

```scala
spark.sql("select ti_version()").collect
```

### Read with TiSpark

You can use Spark SQL to read from TiKV

```scala
spark.sql("use tidb_catalog")
spark.sql("select count(*) from ${database}.${table}").show
```

### Write with TiSpark

You can use Spark DataSource API to write to TiKV and guarantees ACID

```scala
val tidbOptions: Map[String, String] = Map(
  "tidb.addr" -> "127.0.0.1",
  "tidb.password" -> "",
  "tidb.port" -> "4000",
  "tidb.user" -> "root"
)

val customerDF = spark.sql("select * from customer limit 100000")

customerDF.write
.format("tidb")
.option("database", "tpch_test")
.option("table", "cust_test_select")
.options(tidbOptions)
.mode("append")
.save()
```

See [Data Source API User Guide](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/blob/master/docs/features/datasource_api_userguide.md) for more details.

You can also write with Spark SQL since TiSpark 3.1. See [insert SQL](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/blob/master/docs/features/insert_sql_userguide.md) for more detail.

### Write With JDBC DataSource

> You can also write to TiDB with Spark JDBC. You need not TiSpark when you decide to write in this way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also write to TiDB with Spark JDBC. You don't need TiSpark when you decide to write in this way.
```

 // replace the host and port with yours and be sure to use rewrite batch
.option("url", "jdbc:mysql://127.0.0.1:4000/test?rewriteBatchedStatements=true")
.option("useSSL", "false")
// as tested, setting to `150` is a good practice
.option(JDBCOptions.JDBC_BATCH_INSERT_SIZE, 150)
.option("dbtable", s"cust_test_select") // database name and table name here
.option("isolationLevel", "NONE") // set isolationLevel to NONE
.option("user", "root") // TiDB user here
.save()
```

Set `isolationLevel` to `NONE` to avoid large single transactions which might lead to TiDB OOM and also avoid the `ISOLATION LEVEL does not support` error (TiDB currently only supports `REPEATABLE-READ`).

### Delete with TiSpark

You can use Spark SQL to delete from TiKV (Tispark master support)

```
spark.sql("use tidb_catalog")
spark.sql("delete from ${database}.${table} where xxx")
```

See [here](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/blob/master/docs/features/delete_userguide.md) for more details.

### Use with other data source

> You can use multiple catalogs to read from different data sources.

```
// read from hive
spark.sql("select * from spark_catalog.default.t").show

> // join hive and tidb

Author: no. join is a sql operator

> // join hive and tidb

Author: Join Hive tables and TiDB tables

| `spark.tispark.plan.allow_agg_pushdown`         | `true`           | Whether aggregations are allowed to push down to TiKV (in case of busy TiKV nodes)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| `spark.tispark.plan.allow_index_read`           | `true`           | Whether index is enabled in planning (which might cause heavy pressure on TiKV)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

> | `spark.tispark.index.scan_batch_size`           | `20000`          | The number of row key in batch for the concurrent index scan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |

Author: batch is the concept in tispark

| `spark.tispark.plan.unsupported_pushdown_exprs` |                  | A comma-separated list of expressions. In case you have a very old version of TiKV, you might disable some of the expression push-down if they are not supported.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| `spark.tispark.plan.downgrade.index_threshold`  | `1000000000`     | If the range of index scan on one Region exceeds this limit in the original request, downgrade this Region's request to table scan rather than the planned index scan. By default, the downgrade is disabled.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |

> | `spark.tispark.show_rowid`                      | `false`          | Whether to show the implicit row ID if the ID exists                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

Author: I think we need to delete this

| `spark.tispark.tikv.jks_trust_path`             |                  | A JKS format certificate for TiKV Client, that is generated by `keytool`, for example `/home/tispark/config/tikv-truststore`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| `spark.tispark.tikv.jks_trust_password`         |                  | The password of `spark.tispark.tikv.jks_trust_path`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

> | `spark.tispark.tikv.jks_key_path`               |                  | A JKS format key for TiKV Client generated by `keytool`, for example `/home/tispark/config/tikv-clientstore`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |

Author: I don't known if we can delete format

> | `spark.tispark.tikv.jks_key_path`               |                  | A JKS format key for TiKV Client generated by `keytool`, for example `/home/tispark/config/tikv-clientstore`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |

Reviewer: If you want to keep format, maybe ` a key in JKS format` is better.

| `spark.tispark.tikv.conn_recycle_time`          | `60s`            | The interval time of cleaning the expired connection with TiKV. Only take effect when enabling cert reloading. The default is `60s` (60 seconds).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| `spark.tispark.host_mapping`                    |                  | This is route map used to configure public IP and intranet IP mapping. When the TiDB cluster is running on the intranet, you can map a set of intranet IPs to public IPs for an outside Spark cluster to access. The format is `{Intranet IP1}:{Public IP1};{Intranet IP2}:{Public IP2}`, for example `192.168.0.2:8.8.8.8;192.168.0.3:9.9.9.9`.                                                                                                    |

> | `spark.tispark.new_collation_enable`            |                  | When TiDB cluster enable [new collation](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/character-set-and-collation#new-framework-for-collations), this configuration should be `true`, otherwise it should be `false`. If this item is not configured, TiSpark will configure automatically based on the TiDB version. The configuration rule is as follows: If the TiDB version is greater than or equal to v6.0.0, it is `true`; otherwise, it is `false`. |

Author: I think should is better. it is not a must because TiSpark can configure `new collation` automatically

> | `spark.tispark.new_collation_enable`            |                  | When TiDB cluster enable [new collation](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/character-set-and-collation#new-framework-for-collations), this configuration should be `true`, otherwise it should be `false`. If this item is not configured, TiSpark will configure automatically based on the TiDB version. The configuration rule is as follows: If the TiDB version is greater than or equal to v6.0.0, it is `true`; otherwise, it is `false`. |

Reviewer: > TiSpark can configure new collation automatically

If so, I suggest we use `can`.

### Expression Index

`tidb-5.0` supports Expression Index.

TiSpark currently supports retrieving data from table with `Expression Index`, but the `Expression Index` will not be used by the planner of TiSpark.

### TiFlash

TiSpark can read from TiFlash with the configuration `spark.tispark.isolation_read_engines`

### Partition Table support

**Read partition table from TiDB**

TiSpark reads the range and hash partition table from TiDB.

Currently, TiSpark doesn't support a MySQL/TiDB partition table syntax `select col_name from table_name partition(partition_name)`, but you can still use `where` condition to filter the partitions.

TiSpark decides whether to apply partition pruning according to the partition type and the partition expression associated with the table.

Currently, TiSpark partially apply partition pruning on range partition.

The partition pruning is applied when the partition expression of the range partition is one of the following:

+ column expression
+ `YEAR($argument)` where the argument is a column and its type is datetime or string literal that can be parsed as datetime.

> If partition pruning is not applied, TiSpark's reading is equivalent to doing a table scan over all partitions.

Author: why use applicable

.option("useSSL", "false")
// as tested, setting to `150` is a good practice
.option(JDBCOptions.JDBC_BATCH_INSERT_SIZE, 150)
.option("dbtable", s"cust_test_select") // database name and table name here
.option("isolationLevel", "NONE") // set isolationLevel to NONE
.option("user", "root") // TiDB user here
.save()
```

Set `isolationLevel` to `NONE` to avoid large single transactions which might lead to TiDB OOM and also avoid the `ISOLATION LEVEL does not support` error (TiDB currently only supports `REPEATABLE-READ`).

### Delete data using TiSpark

You can use Spark SQL to delete data from TiKV.

```
spark.sql("use tidb_catalog")
spark.sql("delete from ${database}.${table} where xxx")
```

See [delete feature](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/blob/master/docs/features/delete_userguide.md) for more details.

### Work with other data sources

> You can use multiple catalogs to read data from different data sources.

```
// Read from Hive
spark.sql("select * from spark_catalog.default.t").show

// Join Hive tables and TiDB tables
spark.sql("select t1.id,t2.id from spark_catalog.default.t t1 left join tidb_catalog.test.t t2").show
```

> ## TiSpark Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## TiSpark configurations
```

> The configurations in the following table can be put together with `spark-defaults.conf` or passed in the same way as other Spark configuration properties.

> | Key                                             | Default Value    | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Key                                             | Default value    | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
```

| `spark.tispark.plan.unsupported_pushdown_exprs` |                  | A comma-separated list of expressions. In case you have a very old version of TiKV, you might disable the push down of some expressions if they are not supported.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| `spark.tispark.plan.downgrade.index_threshold`  | `1000000000`     | If the range of index scan on one Region exceeds this limit in the original request, downgrade this Region's request to table scan rather than the planned index scan. By default, the downgrade is disabled.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

> | `spark.tispark.show_rowid`                      | `false`          | Whether to show the implicit row ID if the ID exists                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `spark.tispark.show_rowid`                      | `false`          | Whether to show the implicit row ID if the ID exists.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
```

| `spark.tispark.db_prefix`                       |                  | The string that indicates the extra prefix for all databases in TiDB. This string distinguishes the databases in TiDB from the Hive databases with the same name.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| `spark.tispark.request.isolation.level`         | `SI`             | Whether to resolve locks for the underlying TiDB clusters. When you use the "RC", you get the latest version of the record smaller than your `tso` and ignore the locks. When you use "SI", you resolve the locks and get the records depending on whether the resolved lock is committed or aborted.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

> | `spark.tispark.coprocessor.chunk_batch_size`    | `1024`           | Rows fetched from Coprocessor                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
> | `spark.tispark.isolation_read_engines`          | `tikv,tiflash`   | List of readable engines of TiSpark, comma separated. Storage engines not listed will not be read                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `spark.tispark.coprocessor.chunk_batch_size`    | `1024`           | Rows fetched from coprocessor.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| `spark.tispark.isolation_read_engines`          | `tikv,tiflash`   | List of readable engines of TiSpark, comma separated. Storage engines not listed will not be read.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
```

| `spark.tispark.tikv.tls_enable`                 | `false`          | Whether to enable TiSpark TLS. 　                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| `spark.tispark.tikv.trust_cert_collection`      |                  | The trusted certificate for TiKV Client, used for verifying the remote PD's certificate, for example, `/home/tispark/config/root.pem` The file should contain an X.509 certificate collection.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

> | `spark.tispark.tikv.key_cert_chain`             |                  | An X.509 certificate chain file for TiKV Client, for example `/home/tispark/config/client.pem`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
> | `spark.tispark.tikv.key_file`                   |                  | A PKCS#8 private key file for TiKV Client, for example `/home/tispark/client_pkcs8.key`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `spark.tispark.tikv.key_cert_chain`             |                  | An X.509 certificate chain file for TiKV Client, for example, `/home/tispark/config/client.pem`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| `spark.tispark.tikv.key_file`                   |                  | A PKCS#8 private key file for TiKV Client, for example, `/home/tispark/client_pkcs8.key`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
```

Reviewer: Global change

| `spark.tispark.tikv.conn_recycle_time`          | `60s`            | The interval for cleaning expired connections with TiKV. It takes effect only when certificate reloading is enabled. The default value is `60s` (60 seconds).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| `spark.tispark.host_mapping`                    |                  | The route map used to configure the mapping between public IP addresses and intranet IP addresses. When the TiDB cluster is running on the intranet, you can map a set of intranet IP addresses to public IP addresses for an outside Spark cluster to access. The format is `{Intranet IP1}:{Public IP1};{Intranet IP2}:{Public IP2}`, for example, `192.168.0.2:8.8.8.8;192.168.0.3:9.9.9.9`.                                                                                                                                   |

> | `spark.tispark.new_collation_enable`            |                  | When [new collation](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/character-set-and-collation#new-framework-for-collations) is enabled on TiDB, this configuration should be set to `true`. If `new collation` is not enabled on TiDB, this configuration should be set to `false`. If this item is not configured, TiSpark will configure `new collation` automatically based on the TiDB version. The configuration rule is as follows: If the TiDB version is greater than or equal to v6.0.0, it is `true`; otherwise, it is `false`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `spark.tispark.new_collation_enable`            |                  | When [new collation](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/character-set-and-collation#new-framework-for-collations) is enabled on TiDB, this configuration can be set to `true`. If `new collation` is not enabled on TiDB, this configuration can be set to `false`. If this item is not configured, TiSpark configures `new collation` automatically based on the TiDB version. The configuration rule is as follows: If the TiDB version is greater than or equal to v6.0.0, it is `true`; otherwise, it is `false`. |
```

### TLS configurations

> TiSpark TLS has two parts: TiKV Client TLS and JDBC connector TLS. To enable TLS in TiSpark, you need to configure both. `spark.tispark.tikv.xxx` is used for TiKV Client to create a TLS connection with PD and TiKV server. While `spark.tispark.jdbc.xxx` is used for JDBC to connect with TiDB server in TLS connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TiSpark TLS has two parts: TiKV Client TLS and JDBC connector TLS. To enable TLS in TiSpark, you need to configure both. `spark.tispark.tikv.xxx` is used for TiKV Client to create a TLS connection with PD and TiKV server. `spark.tispark.jdbc.xxx` is used for JDBC to connect with TiDB server in TLS connection.
```

> When TiSpark TLS is enabled, you must configure either the X.509 certificate with `tikv.trust_cert_collection`, `tikv.key_cert_chain` and `tikv.key_file` configurations, or the JKS certificate with `tikv.jks_enable`, `tikv.jks_trust_path` and `tikv.jks_key_path` must be configured. `jdbc.server_cert_store` and `jdbc.client_cert_store` are optional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When TiSpark TLS is enabled, you must configure either the X.509 certificate with `tikv.trust_cert_collection`, `tikv.key_cert_chain` and `tikv.key_file` configurations, or the JKS certificate with `tikv.jks_enable`, `tikv.jks_trust_path` and `tikv.jks_key_path`. `jdbc.server_cert_store` and `jdbc.client_cert_store` are optional.
```

|---------------------------------| ------------- | ------------- | ----------- |---------------|
| SQL select without tidb_catalog | ✔           | ✔           |             |               |
| SQL select with tidb_catalog    |               | ✔           | ✔         | ✔             |
| DataFrame append                | ✔           | ✔           | ✔         | ✔             |
| DataFrame reads                 | ✔           | ✔           | ✔         | ✔             |
| SQL show databases              | ✔           | ✔           | ✔         | ✔             |
| SQL show tables                 | ✔           | ✔           | ✔         | ✔             |
| SQL auth                        |               | ✔           | ✔         | ✔             |
| SQL delete                      |               |               | ✔         | ✔             |
| SQL insert                      |               |               |           | ✔              |
| TLS                             |               |               | ✔         | ✔             |
| DataFrame auth                  |               |               |             | ✔             |

> ### Support for expression Index

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Support for Expression Index
```

> ### Support for expression Index

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Support for expression index
```

> TiDB v5.0 supports [expression Index](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md#Expression index).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TiDB v5.0 supports [expression index](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md#expression-index).
```

> TiSpark currently supports retrieving data from table with `expression Index`, but the `expression Index` will not be used by the planner of TiSpark.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TiSpark currently supports retrieving data from tables with `expression index`, but the `expression index` will not be used by the planner of TiSpark.
```

**Read partitioned tables from TiDB**

TiSpark can read the range and hash partitioned tables from TiDB.

Currently, TiSpark does not support a MySQL/TiDB partition table syntax `select col_name from table_name partition(partition_name)`. However, you can still use the `where` condition to filter the partitions.

TiSpark decides whether to apply partition pruning according to the partition type and the partition expression associated with the table.

TiSpark applies partition pruning on range partitioning only when the partition expression is one of the following:

+ column expression
+ `YEAR($argument)` where the argument is a column and its type is datetime or string literal that can be parsed as datetime.

If partition pruning is not applicable, TiSpark's reading is equivalent to doing a table scan over all partitions.

**Write into partitioned tables**

Currently, TiSpark only supports writing data into the range and hash partitioned tables under the following conditions:

+ The partition expression is a column expression.
+ The partition expression is `YEAR($argument)` where the argument is a column and its type is datetime or string literal that can be parsed as datetime.

> There are two ways to write into partition table:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two ways to write into partitioned tables:
```

>
> Because TiSpark accesses TiKV directly, the access control mechanisms used by TiDB Server are not applicable to TiSpark. Since TiSpark v2.5.0, TiSpark supports user authentication and authorization, for more information, see [Security](/tispark-overview.md#security).

## Requirements

+ TiSpark supports Spark >= 2.3, but does not support any Spark versions earlier than 2.3.
+ TiSpark requires JDK 1.8 and Scala 2.11/2.12.
+ TiSpark runs in any Spark mode such as `YARN`, `Mesos`, and `Standalone`.

## Recommended deployment configurations of Spark

> **Warning:**
>

> > You may find TiSpark can be deployment by TiUP in this [doc](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/tispark-deployment-topology#tispark-deployment-topology). Note that it has been deprecated.

Reviewer 2: use file link

The following versions of TiSpark's jar will no longer include `mysql-connector-java`.

- TiSpark > 3.0.1
- TiSpark > 2.5.1 for TiSpark 2.5.x
- TiSpark > 2.4.3 for TiSpark 2.4.x

Now, TiSpark needs `mysql-connector-java` for writing and auth. Please import `mysql-connector-java` manually when you need to write or auth.

- you can import it by putting the jar into spark jars file

- you can also import it when you submit spark job like

```
spark-submit --jars tispark-assembly-3.0_2.12-3.1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar,mysql-connector-java-8.0.29.jar
```

### Choose TiSpark Version

You can choose TiSpark version according to your TiDB and Spark version

| TiSpark version | TiDB、TiKV、PD version | Spark version | Scala version |
| ---------------  | -------------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| 2.4.x-scala_2.11 | 5.x, 4.x             | 2.3.x, 2.4.x   | 2.11          |
| 2.4.x-scala_2.12 | 5.x, 4.x             | 2.4.x         | 2.12          |
| 2.5.x            | 5.x, 4.x             | 3.0.x, 3.1.x   | 2.12          |
| 3.0.x            | 5.x, 4.x             | 3.0.x, 3.1.x, 3.2.x|2.12|
| 3.1.x            | 6.x, 5.x, 4.x             | 3.0.x, 3.1.x, 3.2.x, 3.3.x|2.12|

> - TiSpark 2.4.3, 2.5.2, 3.0.2,3.1.0 is the latest stable version, which is highly recommended.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- TiSpark 2.4.3, 2.5.2, 3.0.2, 3.1.0 is the latest stable version, which is highly recommended.
```

### Get TiSpark jar

> - get from [maven central](https://search.maven.org/) and search with GroupId [![Maven Search](https://img.shields.io/badge/com.pingcap-tikv/tispark-green.svg)](http://search.maven.org/#search%7Cga%7C1%7Cpingcap)

Reviewer 2: Is this badge right? Why it's `tikv/tispark`?

Author: I will try to get a new one

| DataFrame append                | ✔           | ✔           | ✔         | ✔             |
| DataFrame reads                 | ✔           | ✔           | ✔         | ✔             |
| SQL show databases              | ✔           | ✔           | ✔         | ✔             |
| SQL show tables                 | ✔           | ✔           | ✔         | ✔             |
| SQL auth                        |               | ✔           | ✔         | ✔             |
| SQL delete                      |               |               | ✔         | ✔             |
| SQL insert                      |               |               |           | ✔              |
| TLS                             |               |               | ✔         | ✔             |
| DataFrame auth                  |               |               |             | ✔             |

### Expression Index

`tidb-5.0` supports Expression Index.

TiSpark currently supports retrieving data from table with `Expression Index`, but the `Expression Index` will not be used by the planner of TiSpark.

### TiFlash

TiSpark can read from TiFlash with the configuration `spark.tispark.isolation_read_engines`

### Partition Table support

> **Reading partition table from TiDB**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Read partition table from TiDB**
```

Currently, TiSpark partially apply partition pruning on range partition.

The partition pruning is applied when the partition expression of the range partition is one of the following:

+ column expression
+ `YEAR($argument)` where the argument is a column and its type is datetime or string literal
  that can be parsed as datetime.

If partition pruning is not applied, TiSpark's reading is equivalent to doing a table scan over all partitions.

**Write into partition table**

Currently, TiSpark only supports writing into the range and hash partition table under the following conditions:

+ the partition expression is column expression
+ the partition expression is `YEAR($argument)` where the argument is a column and its type is datetime or string literal
  that can be parsed as datetime.

There are two ways to write into partition table:

1. Use datasource API to write into partition table which supports replace and append semantics.
2. Use delete statement with Spark SQL.

> [!NOTE]
> Currently the charset only supported is utf8mb4 and [`new_collations_enabled_on_first_bootstrap`](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/tidb-configuration-file#new_collations_enabled_on_first_bootstrap)

> > need to be set to `false` in TiDB.

Reviewer 2: not right for 3.1

Author: Partition table write still has this limitation

+ It is recommended to provision at least 8 to 16 cores per machine for Spark. First, you must assign all the CPU cores to Spark.

The following is an example based on the `spark-env.sh` configuration:

```
SPARK_EXECUTOR_MEMORY = 32g
SPARK_WORKER_MEMORY = 32g
SPARK_WORKER_CORES = 8
```

## Get TiSpark

TiSpark is a third-party jar package for Spark that provides the ability to read and write TiKV.

### Get mysql-connector-j

The `mysql-connector-java` dependency is no longer provided because of the limit of the GPL license.

The following versions of TiSpark's jar will no longer include `mysql-connector-java`.

- TiSpark > 3.0.1
- TiSpark > 2.5.1 for TiSpark 2.5.x
- TiSpark > 2.4.3 for TiSpark 2.4.x

However, TiSpark needs `mysql-connector-java` for writing and authentication. In such cases, you need to import `mysql-connector-java` manually using either of the following methods:

- Put `mysql-connector-java` into spark jars file.

- Import `mysql-connector-java` when you submit a spark job. See the following example:

```
spark-submit --jars tispark-assembly-3.0_2.12-3.1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar,mysql-connector-java-8.0.29.jar
```

> ### Choose TiSpark Version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Choose TiSpark version
```

### Other Features

- [Push down](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/blob/master/docs/features/push_down.md)
- [Delete with TiSpark](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/blob/master/docs/features/delete_userguide.md)
- [Stale read](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/blob/master/docs/features/stale_read.md)
- [TiSpark with multiple catalogs](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/wiki/TiSpark-with-multiple-catalogs)
- TiSpark TLS : See TLS Configuration section in this article
- [TiSpark Telemetry](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/blob/master/docs/features/telemetry.md)
- [TiSpark plan](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/blob/master/docs/features/query_execution_plan_in_TiSpark.md)

## Statistics information

TiSpark uses the statistic information for:

+ Determining which index to use in your query plan with the lowest estimated cost.
+ Small table broadcasting, which enables efficient broadcast join.

For TiSpark to use the statistic information, first make sure that relevant tables have been analyzed.

See [here](https://github.com/pingcap/docs/blob/master/statistics.md) for more details about how to analyze tables.

> Since TiSpark 2.0, statistics information is default to auto-load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since TiSpark 2.0, statistics information is automatically loaded by default.
```

## FAQ

> See our wiki [TiSpark FAQ](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/wiki/TiSpark-FAQ)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [TiSpark FAQ](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/wiki/TiSpark-FAQ).
```

spark.sql.tidb.password $your_tidb_server_password
```

For more information, see [Authorization and authentication through TiDB server](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/blob/master/docs/features/authorization_userguide.md).

### Other features

- [Push down](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/blob/master/docs/features/push_down.md)
- [Delete with TiSpark](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/blob/master/docs/features/delete_userguide.md)
- [Stale read](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/blob/master/docs/features/stale_read.md)
- [TiSpark with multiple catalogs](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/wiki/TiSpark-with-multiple-catalogs)

> - [TiSpark TLS](#tls-configuration)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [TiSpark TLS](#tls-configurations)
```

- [TiSpark Telemetry](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/blob/master/docs/features/telemetry.md)
- [TiSpark plan](https://github.com/pingcap/tispark/blob/master/docs/features/query_execution_plan_in_TiSpark.md)

## Statistics information

TiSpark uses the statistic information for:

+ Determining which index to use in your query plan with the minimum estimated cost.
+ Small table broadcasting, which enables efficient broadcast join.

To allow TiSpark to access statistic information, make sure that relevant tables have been analyzed.

> See [Introduction to Statistics](https://github.com/pingcap/docs/blob/master/statistics.md) for more details about how to analyze tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [Introduction to Statistics](/statistics.md) for more details about how to analyze tables.
```
